# Spike Phage DMS Repo

This repository contains all necessary code for analysis described in "High resolution profiling of pathways of escape for SARS-CoV-2 spike-binding antibodies by Garrett et al"

The repository contains the code for generating the sequences used to make the Spike Phage-DMS library, a [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html) pipeline
dubbed [phip-flow](https://github.com/matsengrp/phip-flow) to align illumina sequencing reads, along with all analysis and plotting code.

### Abstract

Defining long-term protective immunity to SARS-CoV-2 is one of the most pressing questions of our time and will require a detailed understanding of potential ways this virus can evolve to escape immune protection. Immune protection will most likely be mediated by antibodies that bind to the viral entry protein, Spike (S). Here we used Phage-DMS, an approach that comprehensively interrogates the effect of all possible mutations on binding to a protein of interest, to define the profile of antibody escape to the SARS-CoV-2 S protein using COVID-19 convalescent plasma. Antibody binding was common in two regions: the fusion peptide and linker region upstream of the heptad repeat region 2. However, escape mutations were variable within these immunodominant regions. There was also individual variation in less commonly targeted epitopes. This study provides a granular view of potential antibody escape pathways and suggests there will be individual variation in antibody-mediated virus evolution. 

### Spike Phage-DMS library design

All code used to optimize sequences and generate oligonucleotides to create the Spike Phage-DMS library can be found within the `library-design` directory. See README file within that directory for a description of the files needed and scripts run.

### Alignment of sequence reads

**phip-flow analysis environment**

The library design script and analysis notebooks contain all code needed to run analysis 
for the manuscript using custom code from 
[phippery](https://github.com/matsengrp/phippery) along with a few other popular python packages.

We suggest using [conda](https://www.anaconda.com/) to create the environment like so:
```
conda env create -f environment.yml && conda activate pan-cov-manuscript
mkdir -p _ignore && cd _ignore
git clone git@github.com:matsengrp/phippery.git
cd phippery && python setup.py install --user && cd ../../
```

### Final analysis and plotting of data

All code used to wrangle and plot data to generate figures for publication can be found within the `analysis-and-plotting` directory, and requires the `Curated_Samples_Phage_DMS_Analysis.csv` output file generated by the phip-flow pipeline.


